but right now we're going to talk with
Mohamed el-erian here's the Alliance
chief economic advisor and that headline
number of 3.8 million new initial claims
for unemployment benefits coincides with
something you predicted last week that
GDP for this year will contract anywhere
from 10% to 14% are you more pessimistic
where are you at this point as to where
we're all headed with this economy
Mohamed so thank you Adam no I I still
think that we're gonna have the worst
recession since the Great Depression
it will make 2008 nine look like a flesh
wound which is a huge statement if we
all remember how bad that is
and the numbers so far confirm
unfortunately that we on track for that
whether it's today's droplets claims
which as you pointed out takes the total
number to 30 million in just six weeks
30 million that is 18 percent of the
work of the labor force or whether it's
yesterday's GDP number that suggests
that the second quarter hit may be as
big as minus 40 so these are big numbers
they're unprecedented item they are
unprecedented Mohamed and of course
we've seen unprecedented response to
them as well we heard of course from
from the Fed yesterday and this morning
as well introducing some new facets to
its lending programs we've had this huge
fiscal response in the end oh you know
as healin musk said there are businesses
that are still not going to survive this
it seems like there's no way that can be
avoided but what more at this point can
either monetary or fiscal be doing so if
you look at whether its monetary or
fiscal it's not an issue of willingness
they're willing to throw everything at
it it's not a if you have effect of
ability massive balance sheets that
they're willing to use it is
effectiveness and you have two problems
on the fiscal side the pipes aren't in
place to get the money they're quickly
and on the monetary side it operates
mainly through asset markets so you
decouple massively the financial markets
wall street from mains
creating a set of problems so I think
it's not it's just an issue of
effectiveness we not built to deal with
this yes there will be lots of
bankruptcies and yes there will be lots
of unemployment I wish we could avoid it
but until we resolve the inconsistency
that you just refer to between what this
stage of the healthcare policy calls for
isolation separation social distancing
and what the economy is wired for the
exact opposite mohamad I'm curious how
you think that the the new guidelines
were getting from the Fed on the Main
Street lending facility are going to
impact what you just said because it's
still Congress still has to act and this
is just the monetary side of it but
won't it help so it is help and I think
the Fed is sensitive to the accusation
that once again it's Wall Street's
that's benefiting and not Main Street so
they've basically allowed this this
program to be used by more companies so
that that's good news but it does
increase that Adam I mean we have this
issue where we're gonna emerge of this
from this with fewer companies and they
will be more highly indebted Mohammed is
it's truly Allah Rocha can we talk a bit
more about this idea of decoupling Wall
Street from Main Street and the problems
that it will create because it does seem
that the Fed is aware that their
reputation won't match the last crisis I
guess you could say maybe in a way it
was a bit tarnished or the perception of
it from Main Street do you think there's
anything they can do to move the needle
and if not what are those problems
beyond just the death so that trying
Julia and if you listen to yesterday to
chairman Powell he went out of his way
to be sympathetic to Main Street to
point out how the programs are supposed
to benefit Main Street but the numbers
are so stark that I way that his message
won't go through is it problematic yes
it is problematic because it accentuates
the three inequalities we had coming in
wealth remember who owns the assets the
rich income remember who's able to keep
their jobs easier the rich they're more
highly qualified who can work at home
easily and opportunity
and you're seeing this in terms of the
young for example being hit particularly
hard by the topless claims and the
second issue that's problematic
is it suggests that the Fed can be a
quasi fiscal agency but it picks winners
and losers and that perception can be
quite dangerous so I do where we
hopefully the fiscal side will step up
and will allow Main Street to have less
damage but otherwise central bank
credibility and I suspect central bank
independence will be under more pressure
Mohamed's Brian Chang here that's a
great point that you make and I'm
wondering how you think this moment
where the feds had to resort to these
unconventional tools that were viewed
more unconventional than QE I've kind of
changed the paradigm for the central
bank operating structure when we think
about Bernanke's 97 paper he was talking
about you know the credit channel not
being the priority or the main means by
which the central bank's do do policy
that's mostly interest rates that's
changed where do you see the role of the
credit Channel from Powell's view and
how do you think that's really gonna
change what's probably gonna be a
decades of low rates low inflation
environments so Brian that that's a
great point because we have seen a
dramatic change in the use of the credit
channel the fact that a central bank is
willing to selectively go into high
yield is revolutionary
remember central banks are not supposed
to take on credit and default risk but
that's what you do when you're going to
high yield whether it has fallen angels
or you buy the index which they said
they intend to do both they haven't done
it yet but they intend to do both that
is a revolutionary change we're gonna
come out of this with a massive
entanglement of both the Fed and the
government in private-sector activity
and it's a spaghetti ball this is not
something that is being done according
to principles it is a spaghetti ball
that we're gonna somehow have to
untangle over time and it's gonna be a
hit I'm afraid to productivity so we're
gonna come out of this with higher debt
lower productivity because in addition
to this hit to public private
relationships we're also gonna have the
rewiring or supplied
so it's a different economy we're coming
up out to grind when we get through this
crisis and Muhammad as you said the the
Fed is can be perceived as being put in
a tough position of choosing winners and
losers
I'll give credit to Cameron Christ over
at Bloomberg he's macro strategist
therefore sparking this next question he
pointed out that because of this
mainstream lending program not only will
companies have more debt but they'll
have debt at very low rates whereas many
Americans who have high debt loads
pre-existing for things like student
debt are paying astronomical rates in
some cases on that debt or at the very
least higher rates than corporate
America is paying now obviously you're
talking about pricing risk here but even
so does that need to be addressed and
and how and it's a difficult one because
we don't know how long this crisis is
gonna last so far we have stumbled into
the assumption I'm gonna use game theory
terms this is not to suggest that this
is a game this is really really serious
and tragic but game theory has a way of
simplifying issues it matters whether
you're playing a one-round game or multi
round game the notion that the
government is all in imagine the image
of poker you're all in suggests a
one-round game if this turns out to be a
multi round game then I don't think
we're gonna have a choice but to extend
what is the facto debt forgiveness
because when you lend to someone at much
lower weights at subsidized rates you're
basically subsidizing part of their debt
we're gonna have to extend that loan
forgiveness so we are gonna have a lot
of difficult questions to ask if it
turns out that this is a multi round
game mom and I want to go back to your
spaghetti bowl reference because
something the feds about to add into
that on top of everything else is our
municipal bonds and there is this
ongoing fight between Mitch McConnell
and Chuck Schumer and then of course the
governor in New York about whether
states should be allowed to declare
bankruptcy the bottom line on this is
when they get into this mess with
municipal bonds and you're talking about
loan forgiveness on the corporate side
there might be demands for states to be
able to refinance their obligations to
pensioners isn't that going to create
even more problems down the road and
that's Adam that's the problem is if
it's a multi round game then it turns
out that a lot of what you're doing now
is gonna complicate things down the road
the problem is there isn't a better
alternative that that's the irony is
this sudden stop is so deep that this
notion of oh let them just default we
don't know how to default in an orderly
way defaults have consequences and what
everybody is trying to avoid is
liquidity problems become becoming
solvency problems any liquidity crisis
most mistakes are recoverable with time
in a solvency crisis then not because
capital is impaired permanently and I
think everybody's trying to avoid
liquidity problems become insolvency
issues but if these hits are repeated if
we go into a W pattern which is a
possibility hopefully it's not the
baseline but if we go into a W pattern
that all your questions will become
really relevant and markets will have to
start dealing with with the higher
probability of capital impairment which
we have not as yet I'm in the aggregate
do you see any of the central banks
around the world having a higher risk of
reaching a solvency issue as opposed to
liquidity issue you had the ECB this
morning saying they were gonna try to
provide liquidity through the peltro
program and I can't even keep track of
all these acronyms but a peltro program
targeting money markets through
longer-term loans I'm wondering do you
think the ECB the BOJ the Fed which one
of those three maybe is that the best I
guess control right now of liquidity
conditions so the good news if your
central bank with a printing press in
the basement and you are indebted in
your own currency you can't go and solve
it you can always refinance yourself
there are consequences to that very
different on emerging markets where the
debt is in dollars and you're printing
local currency so I don't worry about
the central banks becoming insolvent
that's not gonna happen in any state of
the world that's not gonna happen in the
advanced countries what you wish though
is the credibility of central banks
remember that forward guidance is a very
powerful policy tool the political
independence of central bank and then
the global standing of central bank that
is what you whisk but it's not a
solvency risk Mohammed and you talked
about the sort of divorce between the
marks and economy but we haven't and
Main Street and Wall Street all of these
sort of breakdowns we haven't really
talked about what investors should be
doing right now I mean they've been
buying today notwithstanding we've seen
this big rebound in stocks um do you
think that that's the right positioning
right now or do you think that's
particularly high risk so the mindset in
markets in the market right now the
combined man said is win a win-win
situation either it turns out that we're
really smart we have looked through all
the terrible earnings the terrible
economic data to the other side of their
recovery and let's not forget the u.s.
is a viable economy the global economy
is viable so we are simply betting on
the future we win if we get it right and
if we get it wrong it doesn't matter the
Fed is already in high yield high yield
is just one level above equities and of
course they're gonna come back hit cut
gonna come in so that's the win-win
strategy there's a massive amount of
ball hazard to tell you the truth I'm
not comfortable with it I'm comfortable
with a different thing that has done as
well since the March 23rd lows and it's
outperforming year-to-date which is the
up in quality trade and in the up in
quality trade emphasizes strong balance
sheet so you get resilience positive
cash flow so you get agility and a
favorable balance between virtual and
physical space
so things have name like Microsoft
Amazon Google they have done extremely
well and they have owned in some cases
done better at keeping up it in other
cases just kept up with the market since
March 23rd but year-to-date
they're still doing so it's the upside
you get a claim on the upside while
protecting against the downside
mom and as we wrap this up I've got a
very broad question for you based on
everything we've asked most of the
people watching probably would identify
themselves as middle class maybe upper
middle class or as the joke goes what
comfortable um ten years from now will
we have the same amount of people saying
they're middle class or are we really
looking at a contraction so nothing is
predestined out of it depends on what we
do and I keep on stressing we cannot and
should not repeat the mistake of the
global financial crisis if you remember
back then we were also in a war against
a global depression the causes were
different but we came this close to a
global depression we won that war but we
didn't secure the peace and we didn't
secure a piece of high sustainable and
inclusive growth we have the same
situation today a global a war against a
global depression which hopefully we
will win but unless we think now about
your question we will not secure the
peace there are things we can and should
be doing today so that we both win the
war and secure the peace Mohamed
el-erian is the Alliance chief economic
adviser it's always good to have you
here on Yahoo Finance all the best to
you and your family Mohammed Thank You
Keith stay safe everybody hey investors
Zach Guzman here are you interested in
learning more about the markets and
getting the latest financial news well
then click right here to subscribe to
our Yahoo Finance youtube channel get
the latest up-to-the-minute market
analysis big interviews in the world of
finance and information on how to manage
your money every day wherever you are